EXPLANATION OF FILLING (by Caroline Hughes)

Data gaps existed in all the datasets due to sensor breakage, battery
failure on the data logger, or sensor removal for farm operations such as
tillage.. In order to have a complete dataset for the yield analysis, gaps
were filled from a nearby sensor that had data during the gap period,
referred to as the replacement sensorbased on the correlation analysis
described below. The replacement sensor was selected by determining the
highest Pearson correlation coefficient between each sensor and those at
another plot at the same depth or in the same plot at an adjacent depth.
Correlation coefficients were calculated over the entire soil moisture
record, using only the periods when data were available for both sensors.
Correlation coefficients between sensors ranged from 0.5 to 0.92. If no
correlation coefficient was found higher than 0.5 and missing data occurred
in the record, these gaps were not filled by the correlated pair method but
instead filled with linear interpolation between the soil moisture at the
last available time and the time when data resumes.

Once a replacement sensor was selected and a period of missing data
identified, a scaling ratio, S, was calculated based on the twelve-hour mean
of soil moisture prior to the outage. Values were estimated by multiplying
the soil moisture in the replacement sensor by the scaling ratio for each
hour of the outage:

The filling method based on correlated pairs worked to remove gaps unless
both a sensor and its replacement had missing data at the same time. After
the filling process, each plot had a complete volumetric water content time
series from every sensor. The rapid changes in soil moisture from the 100 cm
sensors at St. Johns S3, St. Johns N3, SERF F5, and SERF F2 raised questions
about whether these measurements at the 100 cm depth were reliable enough
for analysis. At St. Johns N3, the data from the 100 cm sensor create a
pattern unlike any of the other sensor measurements, suggesting a problem
with the sensor caused by poor soil contact or an issue with the data
logger. Though the rapid fluctuations in soil water content may represent
preferential flow, there is also the possibility that the measurements were
dissimilar to the others because of a change in the soil properties between
the 60 and 100 cm sensors. Only the 10, 20, 40 and 60 cm volumetric water
retention measurements were used in the analysis of excess and deficit soil
moisture.

To convert volumetric water content to equivalent depth, each soil moisture
sensor was assumed to represent the midpoint of a layer of soil with
thickness ranging from 15 to 30 cm (Table 1). To analyze multiple layers,
the equivalent depths determined at each layer were added.
